Thank you.
Hi, my name is John. As you heard that
that's that's who I am described in in a
few beautiful words.
So I'm here to like dig into some pretty
nerdy deep stuff and I'm hoping that
you're all here for it. This is not
going to be rust specific even though a
lot of the stuff that I do is rust, but
it happens to intersect quite well with
people who care about rust tend to care
about things like concurrency and
parallelism and speed and data systems
and algorithms and I have a feeling that
much of this audience cares about
similar things even if it's not because
of the rust programming language. I'm
hoping this will apply more broadly.
You'll see a couple of slides that have
tiny bits of rust code on them, but I
think you'll be able to recognize and
map it sort of mentally to whatever is
your language of preference.
This talk is titled are mutexes slow?
And there's a I think it's a good word
just law of headlines that says you can
answer any such question with no and of
course the answer to this is also no
perhaps unsurprisingly, but the reasons
why are interesting because we have all
observed or at least most of us have
that a mutex was slow that a program was
slow because it was stuck taking a mutex
or mutexes were taking forever to load.
So how can it be that I claim that
they're not slow if I've observed that
they are slow. And in fact you know the
the you know if we if you dig into and
ask people what a mutex is for you'll
hear things like mutexes are slow.
You'll hear that reader writer locks are
the thing that you should use instead.
If you have read heavy workloads just
use a reader writer lock and then you
can have as many readers as you want and
the universe is happy and everything is
fast. You'll also hear things like lock
free data structures are the best of the
fastest, right? And you might wonder
well what does that mean? What what is a
lock free data structure, but also what
is a lock? Like a lock is a mutex, okay,
but what is a mutex? Like really what's
going on at the CPU level and that's the
kind of stuff we're going to dig into
today to try to give you some intuition
for if you take a given concurrent
algorithm, how is it going to perform?
Why is it going to be slow if it is
indeed slow? And what does slow even
mean?
Um
And the the reality is sort of to give a
uh
a preview, the reality is it's
complicated. It's nuanced. There's stuff
There's like stuff further down that
influences why these are slow.
Um the test we're going to use here is
actually a very straightforward one. So,
we're going to have a counter, and we're
going to read that counter.
Nothing is going to update the counter.
We're just going to read it. And we're
going to try to read it from many many
threads.
Um the This is in Rust code, but the
basic idea is you have some counter.
It's shared. In this case, it's
atomically reference counter, but it
just It's a way that you can have many
threads that point to the same one, the
same counter. And then in a loop, we're
going to take a lock on that counter,
and then we're going to read that
counter. That's the star guard here. The
reason I have black box here is to make
sure that the compiler will actually do
the read. Cuz otherwise, it would just
optimize this code to this loop is a
loop that does nothing. So, I don't even
take the lock, and then, you know,
I'm not measuring anything interesting.
And then I'm just going to run lots of
these in parallel.
Um
Um we're going to like There There are
no rights. Uh so, surely this should be
fast. Um And let's try and see what
happens if we try to use a mutex here.
So, there's going to be a mutex over a
counter where we just read. This first
graph, very easy. It is a graph that
starts very high when there is one
thread. It gets about 250 million
operations per second, 250 million reads
per second. Which, if you have like a
2.5 GHz CPU, that means you take about
10 instructions to take the lock and do
the read. That's pretty good. When you
have two cores, it drops to about a
tenth of that. It drops to about 25
million instead of 250 million
operations per second. So, the graph
looks like this.
And then, once you add more threads
after that, it looks almost flat. It
goes down a little bit more, but then it
just stays flat very, very low.
And so this might make you conclude,
well, okay, mutexes are slow. I just
This is a code that just does reads.
What is the mutex doing? Why is it so
slow just because I added more threads?
What you might assume is that a mutex,
which is supposed to be mutual
exclusion, only allows one thread to
make progress at a time. So you would
not expect it to get better with more
threads, but you kind of expect it to
stay the same. Right? The mutex should
allow one operation to happen be
happening at all times. That is not what
the graph
looks like. In- Instead, more threads
give you worse performance. Now, what
does this look like for reader-writer
locks? Well, here's there's another
graph, but this one's also very easy to
explain because in this graph, there are
two lines that sit on top of each other.
The reader-writer lock, when you again
only take the read lock and all you do
is read, as you add more threads, the
performance starts out really good,
about the same as a mutex, and then gets
about 10x worse. It ends up doing
slightly better than the mutex, but it
also, as as you'll see on the graph, uh
the reader-writer lock actually gets
worse over time.
So as you add more readers, the
reader-writer lock ends up being worse
than a mutex as you keep going.
The mutex sort of drops and then stays
flat.
And And what I'd like to sort of probe
you for here is the
to see if you have intuition for why
that might be. And my hope, or the
intention of this talk, is that the
answer is I don't really know why that
would be. That's weird. And that I can
hopefully try to tell you why it behaves
that way, and why that's actually kind
of what we would expect.
So clearly, there there's something else
going on here. And so we need to talk
about CPU caches in order to understand
the sort of underlying problem here. So
with this graph, you'll see, as as I
said, it starts out really high, and
then it gets worse, and then it stays
about flat. Then we will see a graph
that shows both the mutex and the
reader-writer lock. Uh the blue the blue
line here is the reader-writer lock. And
and again, as you see, like it it starts
slightly worse than the mutex, but it
doesn't drop quite as much, but over
time, as you add more readers, the
reader-writer lock gets worse than the
mutex gets worse. The mutex sort of
stabilizes.
And so, this is where we need to talk
about CPU caches. Um and indeed, CPU
caches are these things that CPUs have
built into them to try to make it
cheaper to access the stuff that's
stored in RAM. Because the stuff that's
stored in RAM is really far away from
the CPU. It's far away in the sense that
like the copper wire is far. And so, it
can take you like hundreds of
instructions to reach main memory. And
hundreds of instructions are an eternity
for a CPU. And so, you want to keep some
memory much closer to the CPU, but
closer to the CPU, you also have less
space. So, you don't get to put as much
memory there. You have to be very
diligent about your actual like physical
space usage. Um and so, CPUs actually
have this hierarchy of caches. So,
you'll see that this depends a little
bit on the CPU. So, different CPUs have
different architectures for this, but
it's very common that there are three
levels of cache. L1 cache is very close
to the CPU. It's like soldered onto the
CPU. L3 cache, on the other hand, is
pretty close to RAM. It's not as far as
RAM, but it is closer to RAM.
The L3 cache is usually shared amongst
all of the cores of your CPU. The L1
cache is not shared. The L2 kind of
depends on the CPU. It's just somewhere
in the middle between L1 and L3. Its
latency is somewhere between L1 and L3.
And these also increase in size as you
go up. So, the L1 cache is very small,
the L2 cache is a little larger, and the
L3 cache is decently large, and then
RAM, of course, is is humongous, as we
all know.
Um
Now, what happens if one CPU has some
bit of memory, like the counter we were
talking about, in its local cache?
And then some other CPU core wants to
read that memory, what happens? Well,
there needs to be some kind of cache
coherence protocol to negotiate between
them who's allowed to write it when, and
to make sure that the right value makes
it back to RAM eventually.
And that protocol is called MESI, uh M E
S I. There are a bunch of variants of
it, so there's also uh MSI, and there's
M E ISI, and there's M E There's like a
bunch of different various combinations
of letters protocols, um but most of
them are MESI-like.
Uh MESI stands for Modified, Exclusive,
Shared, and Invalid, and those are the
four states that something can have in
the cache. The cache keeps an entry for
You can think of it logically as like
every piece of memory, like every
address in RAM. Um the reality is it's
not actually every address in RAM, it's
every chunk of RAM. So, the CPU has this
notion of cache lines, so it takes all
of your main memory, it divides it into
um 64-byte
chunks, and those 64-byte chunks are a
cache line.
And so, you took RAM and you just like
write it out, like the first 64 bytes is
one cache line, the next 64 bytes is one
cache line, and so on. And the cache
keeps track of memory on the
sort of boundaries of of cache lines,
and keeps track of which CPU cache has
exclusive access to which cache lines,
or which CPU cores share access to a
given cache line.
Um
And this is where we get into some
really interesting stuff. Um so, when
the state is modified, it means that I
have the only copy. So, if if it's in my
cache as a CPU core and it's marked as
modified, I have the only copy and it is
dirty as in it differs from what's in
RAM.
So, that means if anyone else were to
read it, not only would I need to give
up my permissions, but I would also need
to write it back to a place they could
read it from.
Exclusive means that I have the only
copy, but it's not dirty. So, if someone
else wants it, they can just take it
without having to talk to me first.
Uh or they would need to make sure that
I move mine to invalid, but they don't
need any data from me. Um like because
that data hasn't changed. Then we have
shared, which is multiple caches have
entries for these and those cache
entries are all the same. They all have
the same value. Otherwise, shared would
not be a legal state. And then we have
invalid, which is I don't have a copy of
this cache line.
Um this could be the like it used to be
like it is in my cache in the sense that
I had it previously, but I'm not allowed
to use that cache line entry anymore. It
because it's been given away to someone
else to be exclusive, for example.
Um
if you, for example, are core and you
have a particular cache line in the
shared state and you want to write to
it, the protocol requires that you first
make sure that no one else has it in the
shared state so that only you do and
then that everyone realizes that you
have now moved it to the exclusive
state. And at that point, you're allowed
to read and write it as you wish. You
don't have to tell anyone that you're
now now modifying it even if you did
multiple modifications.
And then eventually, if someone else
wants to modify or read that cache line,
they have to tell you to convert it back
into shared so that they can then get a
copy that they can read from, but cannot
write to.
Um
and and and the the interesting
observation here is that writes to
shared data
requires coordination between cores.
If I have a shared version of a cache
line and and I want to modify it, I must
talk to basically all the other cores
because I need to make sure they know
not to modify it and they know not to
read it either.
And this is where some of that cost come
from. There's a bunch of cross-core
communication.
And in fact, if we look at a
reader-writer lock, then a reader-writer
lock, the implementation of taking the
read lock is actually that you increment
the reader count by one. So, there's a
counter inside of the lock. Not the
counter that we're, you know,
benchmarking here, but inside of the
lock, there's a counter that keeps track
of how many reader threads are there.
And that counter, in order to take the
read lock, you have to write to.
And so, if you have 100 threads that all
want to take the read lock, they're all
doing a write on a shared field.
This means that every core needs to at
some point get that one in exclusive
mode, update it, and then make it shared
again. And then the next core, the one
that wants to read the lock, needs to
get it in exclusive mode, modify it, and
then share it again, and so on through
all 100 cores. And so, in a way, you can
think of this as there's a sequential
part of every reader-writer lock.
But, after you've done this, now you
don't have to talk to the other cores.
But, you do have to do it for the setup.
So, so let's walk through what that
actually looks like. Let's look at if we
have two readers that are both trying to
acquire a read lock.
So, here we have core zero and core one.
The S here is the cache line state for
the cache line that they're operating
on, whatever that might be. And then the
note is just to explain what's
happening. So, initially, let's say that
core zero has exclusive access to this
cache line and core one does not have a
valid entry.
And then core zero wants to do the fetch
add, right? Because it wants to acquire
the read lock. Well, that's easy. It has
exclusive access, so it just marks it
now as modified and then updates the
one. No problem. There's no cross-core
traffic.
Now, core one wants to acquire the lock.
Well, it it observes that
this entry in the cache is already
modified by core zero.
And so, there needs to be now a
write-back from core zero to core one's
cache to inform it of the updated value
because the value got updated at step
one.
So, that
that edit needs to be communicated to
core one.
When that's happened, there's sort of a
the protocol has some various kinds of
optimizations, including things like you
don't need to go via the shared state.
So, you can just give the data over and
say, I'm sort of giving you ownership
alongside the data. And so, at this
point now, core zero has invalid and
core one has modified because it got to
do its fetch add.
And then, core zero wants to release its
read lock. Well, the whole process
happen again. So, now I I need core one
to write back to core zero so that core
zero can get in exclusive state and then
decrement the counter of reader nodes.
Um and so, what we see is if you have
one instance of like I want to acquire
the lock and release the lock, you
actually require two cache line
transfers.
One to get it so you can do the add and
one later so you can get it to do the
release, the subtraction.
Um and each of these transitions costs
about 30 seconds. So, um there's sort of
a this cache line ping-pong ends up
being a really expensive operation
because talking to different parts of
memory cost different amounts of time
because they're different distances from
the cores. Um you'll see here that the
oper- like if you want to read something
or access something in L1 cache, it's 1
nanosecond. It's like no time at all.
But if you have to go to cross-core
communication, which is what you need to
do in order to do that cache line
transfer, that takes about 30
nanoseconds.
And now, imagine that I have to do two
of those, one's to acquire and one's to
release. So, that's 60 nanoseconds in
the good case.
Accessing main memory is 100
nanoseconds. That's the thing that we
think CPUs think take forever. And we're
already over halfway there just by
acquiring the read lock alone.
Um
And and uh the the other thing that that
I think is really interesting here is
that for mutexes, it's not quite as bad.
For mutexes, when you acquire the lock,
you hold the lock and you know that no
one else is going to try to increment
that counter from you because, well,
they can't acquire the lock. So, the
problem, in a way, is reader locks
because for if you have an exclusive
lock, when you release, you know that
you're still the owner of it. Someone
else might have gotten a shared copy,
but they will not have an exclusive
copy. They can't have anything to write
back cuz all they can have done is read.
Um
And so, reader locks almost scale worse
than mutexes here. And this is one of
the reasons why that reader lock thing
gets worse is because as you get more
readers, they contend more and more with
each others. Whereas, if you have many
mutexes, they don't really contend with
each other because they're they're fine
with going one at a time in a sequence
and not causing all this cache line ping
pong.
The reason why people don't think about
this problem that much is because
usually when you interact with locks,
you have a bunch of code in there. Like
after you take the lock, you run a bunch
of code and then you release the lock.
And so, the cost of acquiring the lock
is not really something that matters
that much to you.
But this is not true if you have short
critical sections, like short amounts of
code between acquiring the lock and
releasing it. Because if that's the
case, you're going to find that the time
it took for the cache miss is more than
the time it took for you to run your
code.
And so, in general, you'll find that the
overhead of using a lock goes up the
more you need that lock to be fast.
It's sort of the inverse proportion of
what you want here.
For for longer things, mutexes are
totally fine. Use them as much as you
wish. Um it's primarily when you hit
those those hot critical path loops,
where you also know you have contention,
where you need a mutex because there's
contention, that a mutex doesn't really
work very well.
Um
And this is also why real-world code
tends to not worry too much about these
problems, and it's only when you start
writing pretty specialized code in those
deep hot loops that you need to start
knowing about things like messy.
Um
And so, I want to now take a a sort of
side step to well, what can you do
instead? So, if you can't use mutexes
and you can't use reader-writer locks,
what can you use? And I'm not going to
propose that this is the correct
algorithm. As I'll get to later, this is
a bunch of tradeoffs, too. I just want
to sort of inject in your mind other
kinds of alternatives to sort of let you
think about what else could you do that
doesn't necessarily have this problem,
but might have other problems. So, I
want to talk to you about you with the
left-right data structure. The
left-right data structure is something
that um I used in my PhD research, where
I had enormous amounts of right uh
readers and very few writes. So, I
basically hit this problem, and the
thing that I did in the when I held the
read lock was a hash map look up and
then nothing else.
So, the read was very, very short, and
so the overhead of the reader lock was
just killing me as I needed something
else.
Um
So,
what's interesting here is it was trying
to solve this problem of why do all the
readers need to access a shared cache
line? It feels like if the readers are
supposed to be independent, they need to
have their own cache lines, not a shared
one. So, how can you design a
concurrency primitive that is still safe
for having there be many reads and a
writer, but it's safe in such a way that
like the readers are cheaper and the
writer has to do more work. Because my
rights were happened relatively
infrequently, so I was willing to pile
more work onto there if the readers
could be highly parallel.
So, the way left-right works is that you
keep two copies of your data.
Um you keep a left copy and a right
copy. Uh you have a pointer in the
center, sort of an atomic pointer that
every reader and the writer has access
to, and that pointer points to the side
that the readers should read from. It
points to the
points to the copy that the reader
should read from. The writer will always
be modifying the one that's not pointed
to by the pointer.
And then when the writer has made a
bunch of modif- modifications to the
writer-owned right copy here, um then it
switches the atomic pointer over to now
point to the other side.
When it points to the other side, then
now all of the readers will start
reading the the right-hand side copy,
and the writer can eventually start
modifying the left-hand side copy.
And the intent here was the readers
might not need to coordinate at all
because the writer doesn't really care
what the readers are doing with the
exception of it needs to know when it's
safe for it to start modifying the copy
it switched away from. So, imagine you
have a bunch of read threads that are
reading the left copy before we swap the
pointer. And then the writer swaps the
pointer, those read threads are still in
the left copy. And so some Sorry, left
left copy. Um but so something has to
tell the writer all the readers have
read the updated pointer value now.
They're in the right copy, and so it's
fine for you to just now start modifying
the left copy. So, some mechanism is
needed here, some synchronization
primitive.
Um and it turns out that you can do this
by giving every reader their own cache
line. They have their own counter that
basically keeps track of how many times
they've read the pointer.
And then the writer's job is going to be
look at the counter for every reader. It
has a giant for loop where it loops over
all of the readers that exist, reads all
of their individual counters,
and observes that all of them have
changed by at least one since when the
pointer was swapped.
The reason this works is because when
you switch the So, you read all the You
You switch the pointer, then you read
all of the counters,
and then we you read them again, if
they've changed by at least one, it
means that that reader has read the
updated pointer is now doing a second
operation. And if it's read the pointer,
it has read the changed pointer, and
therefore it's no longer in the original
map.
The interesting thing about this design
is the readers do not share state with
each other.
The readers just keep their own counter
for how many times they have read the
pointer. They do not need to talk to
each other. In other words, if if if we
think back to the MESI protocol, this
means that the core that's running in a
given reader thread
can just keep that cache line in the
exclusive state. Never has to be shared
except for when a writer wants to sort
of do the pointer switch. Because then
the the writer thread, the core that
runs the writer, has to read the counter
from every reader,
and then, you know, turn it into the
shared state, read the value, and then
it goes back to the reader again to
update.
But only when the writer wants to
contend with the readers does anything
interfere with what the reader wants to
do. Otherwise, the readers are
completely independent.
And
And readers become even better than
that. They now don't have to wait for
anything.
They don't have to wait at all. Even if
there is a concurrent right, they can
just keep reading their copy. So, the
reads end up being lock-free.
The reads do not pause for anything. In
fact, they are wait-free. They do not
wait at all. They don't take any locks.
They don't have any loops. They just
read the pointer,
bump their counter, and then access the
data. And that's all they need to do.
And the net result of this is you get a
graph that looks like this, maybe. Yeah.
Uh and so this graph is linear. It goes
up and to the right in exactly the way
you would hope when you increase the
number of threads. And again, that we
now have the intuition to understand
why. It is because the reader threads,
the cores that run the reader threads,
do not have to coordinate and therefore
can just run fully in parallel.
Um
and and yeah. If one of the threads
Here, take this.
If one of the threads is dormant for
some reason or maybe doing a lot of
work, then they just still hold the old
reference and don't increment it. Is
that an issue? Uh-huh. So the algorithm
is slightly more complicated than I told
you. Um so the algorithm is actually
that a reader will um
uh increment its value, its counter
value, um
before it starts an operation,
and again at the end of its operation.
And so what the writer needs to look for
is any reader where the number has gone
up or where it's even.
And that way you you know that like
dormant readers are not a problem.
Readers that continue to hold on to
their access is a problem because they
prevent the writer from starting to
modify the other one. But it doesn't
prevent readers from continuing to read.
It just prevents the the updates to the
map.
So the the next thing you'll observe
here is like the number here is pretty
high.
Like this is 3 billion operations per
second that we get to read. But but
again, it's just because we had
wave hand about 10 cores. And so it
should be about 10 times what we had at
one core, which is not what you get with
a reader-writer lock, even though
the the name sort of implies you might.
And the the key here though
is that this only works if writes are
rare.
If writes are rare, then this performs
really well, really really well, because
the only writes can make contention in
the system. On the other hand, if writes
are not rare, it doesn't perform any
better than what you get with a
reader-writer lock. And in fact, if you
start flipping I didn't include that in
this graph. If you start flipping the
ratios, you do more writes than reads,
this does worse, because the writer has
to do a bunch more work, and you don't
really get the speed performance win
from the readers being lower contention.
And and the intuition here for why the
reader-writer lock gets worse is again
the same one we talked about earlier for
why the reader-writer lock graph goes
down. Is that the reader-writer lock
gets punished more as you add readers.
So here, there are nine times more
readers than there.
Right? So in that case, you you would
expect to get a slow down because they
contend more with each other.
And and I I want to give you a debugging
story here, because there's a there's a
useful insight as part of this. So while
benchmarking left-right 2 produced the
previous graph that went up into the
right linearly, I discovered that it did
not go up into the right linearly. Uh
there was sort of this weird dip where I
was expecting it to keep going linearly,
and instead it dropped significantly. It
dropped by like 10x when it got to four
cores.
And I was like, why is this happening?
This shouldn't be happening. It does not
match my intuition for how CPUs work. Um
and it turned out that the problem here
was not like crossing between NUMA
architectures or like you ended up going
to like a different CPU package that's
further away. Like I I went through all
of these like ideas of maybe it's this,
maybe it's that. Turned out it's
actually pretty simple, and it's
something that
you get like it's the one of the first
things you learn when you deal with
concurrency at this level. It was
something called false sharing.
False sharing happens because remember
how I said the cache doesn't operate on
individual memory addresses, it operates
on cache lines, 64-byte lines. Well, a
counter, you can have more than one
counter in 64 bytes. And so, if you get
unlucky, the counters for So, this is
like the not the counter we're
benchmarking, but the counter inside of
left-right. If multiple threads have
their counters on the same cache line,
then it doesn't matter that one is only
modifying this counter and one is only
modifying this counter, they're on the
same cache line and the ownership, the
messy ownership, is determined based on
the cache line. So, when one writes and
then the other writes, the cache line
will still bounce even though they
update distinct parts of that cache
line.
And so, the fix was like a one-line fix.
It was to add 64-byte alignment to the
type that holds the counters. Because
now they must be on different cache
lines, and the problem went away.
Like it was it was just that. There's
now a new release of left-right that has
this fix in it, so now it should go up
into the right for you as well. I
contributed it upstream to myself. Um
But but it's there's an important
distinction here, which is that
lock-free does not mean contention-free.
Just because there are no locks, does
not mean that the CPU isn't going to
punish you because you made memory move
around a bunch more. Like moving things
across copper wires is expensive, and if
you can avoid doing it, you will have a
faster program.
This is also why it's important to know
about this, to have some amount of the
the intuition for why did this thing
perform that way, or why did it not
perform the way that I wanted to, and
try to like debug in a way where if you
like threw this at a like perf or
something it wouldn't really tell you
because the thing that's going wrong is
like the the CPUs have to talk too much
to each other
which is sort of a layer beyond the
abstraction
layer that we usually reason at.
And what I want the sort of takeaway of
this talk to be is that I want to start
choosing a little more wisely. If you
have to write code that needs to be
highly parallel, highly concurrent, and
sort of sitting in these critical loops
then it's not as though you should just
take the the first algorithm you find
even if it's one that's been benchmarked
against really good performance reviews
or like you
you like look on the the OCaml version
of crates.io for the the fastest mutex
or the fastest reader-writer lock and
then you just use that one because the
reality is you have to pick the
algorithm that best suits the sort of
data transfer patterns that your
application has. Because the way we make
concurrent programs faster is that we
pick algorithms that align with what
your program wants to do. You make use
of every single like weird oddity that
your workload has all of those can be
exploited to make the algorithm slightly
better for your use case.
And and I mean left-right here is a
really good example. It is not a drop-in
replacement. There are a bunch of things
that left-right does that you will not
want to do for most applications. Like
obviously it keeps two copies of all
your data that's pretty expensive. Um
readers can see stale data, right? So
the writer gets to modify the stuff and
thinks it's like modified the stuff but
the readers don't get to see it until
the next time they read after a pointer
swap. Left-right has a mechanism where
the writer can say I now want to wait
like don't return until all the readers
have moved on so you can do that but
that's that then comes with additional
cost to the rights.
Um it's also single writer only. You
cannot have multiple writers in
left-right. It assumes that there's only
one. If you want multiple, you have to
put the right side of it in a mutex. And
then now you have a mutex on top of a
concurrent data structure and you're
going to get sadness. It's possible, but
it's not what it's designed for. Um,
operations also have to be deterministic
so that you can take an arbitrary data
structure and turn it into a
left-rightable data structure. The
reason for this is because when you have
this left-right split, imagine that you
do a bunch of operations to the the for
you left side left copy.
Well, and now you switch the pointer
over. Now you need to take the right
copy and apply the same changes to that
right copy as you applied to the left
copy while it was the active one.
Because it the right copy is sort of
stale now. It didn't see those updates.
That means you need to be able to log,
like keep a log of the updates that have
been applied here but haven't been
applied here. And then you need to be
able to apply them to the other one and
they need to have the same result.
Otherwise, you would end up with the two
copies having different state. And then
readers will get super confused.
And so you can only do this for data
structures that where you're able to
keep an operational log that's
deterministic in how it affects the data
structure. Not all data structures have
that property.
Um, writers also have to wait for all
readers to exit, which like may or may
not be a problem for you. Like maybe you
actually want them to be able to just
run a bunch of writes while the reads
are going. We don't really care. Maybe
that's the application you want. You
want weaker semantics. You could do that
and probably build an even faster data
structure. But the nuances of what you
need is what gives you the performance.
Um, there's a bunch of other stuff like
it's not linearizable, so it's only
eventually consistent, uh, which may or
may not be a problem for you. For
example, I would not use left-right for
financial transactions, uh, but I would
use it for things like caches or lookups
or those kinds of things. So, the
like your mileage may vary. The reality
is that every solution has trade-offs
here, right? It's mutexes are the
correct choice for a bunch of concurrent
algorithms. Just like reader-writer
locks are the correct choice for a bunch
of algorithms. And left-right is the
correct choice for a bunch of them. But
it depends on what your needs are.
And that's what I really want you to
take away from this. Um some of the
questions I would recommend that you try
to ask yourself here is like, what is my
ratio between reads and writes? Those
tend to really affect what algorithm you
use. Um you should ask yourself how long
is the code that I want to execute in a
synchronized way? Cuz if it's short
versus long, that changes the sort of
budget you have for the synchronization.
Um think about how many threads you're
going to have. If you're going to have
three threads, none of this matters.
Right? If you care about a like it's it
should be faster two threads than one,
then okay, maybe it matters a little,
but like you know, we saw the dramatic
graph, it can matter. But usually that's
not the kind of scale or concurrency
where this stuff really becomes
relevant. Um
Can I tolerate eventual consistency?
Like do I need strong consistency in my
reads versus my writes? Do I need, for
example, to be able to read my own
writes? So, imagine that I, as the
writer, I make a modification to the
data structure, and then I try to read
from the data structure, should I be
guaranteed that I read the modification
I just wrote? Left-right does not give
you that guarantee cuz you might read
from another map that's like the other
one than where you were writing.
But if you need that, well, then you
need to take that into account in your
design of the algorithm as well.
Uh do you need linearizability? Like do
you need even even stricter guarantees
about two what two threads can possibly
see in relation to another? Like which
interleavings are possible?
And I'm not going to teach you all of
those things now. It's more that these
are the kinds of things you should ask
yourself if you want to go the sort of
step beyond of just using an
off-the-shelf concurrent algorithm.
Always measure before you start
optimizing these things.
And the real lesson is that it's not
about locks. It was never about locks,
right? Coordination is expensive because
of cache coherence, because of what the
CPU needs to do to guarantee that your
program executes correctly. The locks
are just the interface you happen to be
using. And there are a bunch of other
ways in which CPU caches can burn you as
well, but this is the one you're most
likely to run into without necessarily
realizing that that's the thing that bit
you in the ass.
A couple of other articles that are
really useful that talk about more of
the details here. This this top one I I
really like, which is a breakdown of
like how long do thing does things take
in the CPU? Like how long does it take
to read from disk versus talk to your L2
cache
versus send a TCP packet versus send a
TCP packet to the other side of the
world. Like what is the relative time
scale of these things? Um and some of
the other ones are also just interesting
other data structures you might might be
able to make use of. So for example,
scalable reader writer locks talks about
a way where you take a reader writer
lock and instead of having one counter
for the number of readers, you have one
counter per core per reader.
So there's like you don't have as many
you don't have per reader you only have
per core and therefore most operations
are core local and the writer
walks across all of them.
Uh and so this also can be the kind of
thing that like maybe that fits your use
case better, but ultimately I hope you
you give some of these a read to give
you a better idea of what the trade-off
space looks like and what options you
have if you wanted to write some really
concurrent code.
That's all I have for you. Thank you.
Questions?
Do you have questions now? Cuz you had
you had you had early questions earlier.
Sure, I'll ask one more.
I'm not sure how helpful this will be,
but have there been any interesting
hardware innovations for uh parallel
programming? Like somebody released some
new operation that made like mutexes
like 10 times faster because it was a
native operation.
Um
So so I wouldn't say there's been like
revolutionary new things where like just
whole workloads are now 10x faster, but
the MESI protocol started out as the MSI
protocol and then they added E because
they found like the exclusive state cuz
they found that certain workloads could
avoid like half of their cache line
contention by having this. And I think
they're up to like seven or eight
letters now in some of the more modern
CPU architectures. Part of the problem
is these are often proprietary
protocols. Like we know that they exist
because they are documented in the spec
for the CPU, but they don't tell us like
what does the CPU do internally? They
just sort of tell us how to think about
it. Um some of them are like earlier
versions were open, but later versions
we don't know exactly what the CPUs are
doing, but we know that they work
roughly like this. Um but but nothing
where we've been like this is crazy. I
think the closest I would say is um
there's been some work on like when they
build CPU packages to build them in more
in 3D.
Uh and the reason 3D is cool is because
you can have shorter distances to
things, right? So you can put your cache
above your CPU and so now that cache can
be bigger because it has more space to
grow and so now you have a bigger L3
cache and you can maybe share it among
more cores. This is like the
um for AMD processors they have this
thing called uh
3DX I think it's like you can buy like
their CPU or the same CPU with 3DX in
the name and the 3DX is just like they
stuck an L3 cache on top and so I have
more L3 cache now. Uh and and that ends
up helping for some of this stuff,
right? Because it means you don't need
to go as far when you need to access
data than another core written, for
instance.
But but not really anything that's been
mind-blowing. There There has also been
some cool work on um
uh fetch add. So,
one of the things that's neat about
fetch add is that it's it's fully
commutative, right? The The The The
fetch add operation is add one and tell
me what the number was when you added
one.
And what you can do is you can actually
have lots of CPUs sort of pool their
fetch adds, and then one core runs all
of them, and then sends the results back
to the other cores. And so that way you
don't have to bounce the cache line
around as much. Um I don't know of any
current platforms that do this
optimization, but I know for a period
they did. Um
And again,
part of what makes the answer here
unsatisfying is that so many of these
systems are proprietary, and so it's
just we we don't necessarily know. Uh we
know what was published many years ago,
and then we don't know how much of it is
still in use, so it's a lot of it is
also speculation.
Um
Thank you. Yeah.
Cube.
How would uh performance of left-right
change if you had many or many readers
joining and leaving
over time? Uh for for which data
structure? Oh, for left-right. For
left-right, if you have many readers
joining and leaving over time. So, uh
the The way left-right is currently set
up is that the list of readers is held
in a mutex.
Um and so if a reader wants to join, it
has to take that mutex, uh allocate its
own counter, stick it into the list of
that mutex, and then unlock the mutex.
And the writer uses that same list to
figure out all the readers to read from.
But the readers, once created, never
have to access the mutex until unless
they want to go away. And in fact, even
if they go away, they could just leave
their stuff there because then it's even
and so the writer ignores them, but uh
they should clean it up. Um if this ends
up becoming a bottleneck, then you could
easily make the
that list be a um
a lock-free linked list instead
because you only ever need to add to it
or walk it. You never need index
lookups. And so you could make it like
you could allow readers to join in
parallel as well. Um the only thing
you'd have to be a little bit careful
about is to make sure that the writer
reads all of the counters after it does
the swap.
If it reads any of them before the swap,
then it can get confused. But but
should be doable. It's just I haven't
needed that optimization because readers
joining has been
not the bottleneck.
Hm?
Uh kind of getting at the a a similar
thing to the hardware question, is how
much variety is there in implementation
of mutexes on a software level and how
much of a difference does that make? On
the software level, mutexes are
a little bit of weird beasts. So,
um the there was a period of time where
there were a lot of like every language
had their own implementation.
Um and then a bunch of companies wrote
faster implementations they wanted to
use. And then eventually we got better
operating support for mutexes. So,
futexes for example are fast user space
uh mutexes in in Linux. And
you can usually just use those. Like you
don't really need a lot of packaging on
top of it. Um
and then in in later years we found
people who tried to do even like
different kinds of optimizations on the
mutexes so they're not necessarily about
decreasing the contention cuz that's
gotten to the point where like it's just
the baseline contention. You you can't
really do any better. Um but they try to
decrease the size of the mutex.
Um so there are data structures for
example where I think the size of a
mutex is one byte.
Um, but they can still make it work.
Is it two bits now? We're down to two
bits?
Yeah. But the problem of course is then
you start if you start packing many of
them together, then now you hit the
cache line problem. And so now they're
contending with each other and so it
doesn't really help to make them smaller
unless you strategically choose mutexes
that are like don't contend with each
other on the same cache line. And you
can see how deep this rabbit hole goes.
Um, I see. But in terms of quality of
implementation, I would say they're
they're all roughly equivalent now. The
The exception is when you start looking
at things like reader writer locks where
different operating systems have very
different mechanisms for them and they
need to like just like mutexes they have
to hook into the operating system to
make sure that a thread that can't take
the lock right now is unable to take the
lock. For example, a reader comes but a
writer is currently holding the lock.
That thread wants to go to sleep. So it
needs to talk to the operating system
and then the operating system needs to
have a mechanism to wake it back up. Um,
and and that the the sort of how reader
writer locks should work in the
operating system I think there's still
some iteration on. Also in user space
like how how you place the how like how
can you take the reader writer mechanism
the operating system system gives you
and make it more scalable for example by
keeping multiple copies one per core
where
what like a a given thread will do is
look up what core it's on, pick that
reader lock, and then take that one. Um,
and so that way you can you can like
build better things on top of the
operating system so that there's enough
more sort of design space for reader
writer locks than there is for mutexes.
Nice. Thanks.
I have a question back there, no?
Um, you mentioned in your earliest code
example that um
you needed to provide a little compiler
hint to prevent the compiler from
optimizing away your entire benchmark
setup. Um I'm curious about like what
sorts of optimizations exist in
compilers around mutex handling
um and if there are any particularly
surprising or shocking ones you've seen.
So, compilers tend to be kind of careful
around mutexes because users tend to
assume that they
will operate in certain ways. But but
the way they do that is usually by
having uh barriers. So, there's like
I don't want to get too deep into like
the different kinds of barriers and like
the various like seek const versus
acquire versus release and stuff. That's
going to get so painful, but um the the
compiler basically injects these little
special sparkly bits in your in your
assembly in the generated code where
sometimes it's for the compiler,
sometimes for the CPU, sometimes for
both that says, "Don't move You're not
allowed to move reads before this point
or you're not allowed to write move
rights after this point." Um and vice
versa to try to basically ensure that,
for example, if you take a lock and then
you read something after you took the
lock, the CPU can't do out-of-order
execution and do the read before it took
the lock cuz that would be
not okay. Um
but that's not really a
it's not really a like a compiler thing.
It's more of a the implementation of the
data structure needs to know to inject
those that those sparkly bits uh to to
make this work correctly. Uh and if you
don't, you would end up with a mutex
that looks like it works correctly, but
sometimes you read the value before you
got the lock. Um
uh compilers do tend to be
like very good at optimization, a little
bit better than we would like them to
be, right? Um but but we would rather
that than the other way around,
probably, maybe. But there has been an
argument in like recent years for dumber
compilers cuz they're like CPUs have
gotten faster, so make the compilers
dumber so that we can do more stupid
and have it do the correct thing.
Um
but but I wouldn't say like compilers
are
uh
they're not like deeply tied to how
mutexes work at all.
I think we're good.
All right, thank you, everyone.